Thomwolf/evaluating mmlu leaderboard (#1258)
huggingface/blog: evaluating-mmlu-leaderboard.md

---
title: "What was going on with the Open LLM Leaderboard?"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/evaluating-mmlu-leaderboard/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: clefourier
- user: SaylorTwift
- user: thomwolf
---

<!-- {blog_metadata} -->
<!-- {authors} -->

Recently an interesting discussion arose on Twitter following the release of [**Falcon 🦅**](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b) and its addition to the [Open LLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard), a public leaderboard comparing open access large language models.

The discussion centered around one of the four evaluations displayed on the leaderboard: a benchmark for measuring [Massive Multitask Language Understanding](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.03300) (shortname: MMLU).

The community was surprised that MMLU evaluation numbers of the current top model on the leaderboard, the [**LLaMA model 🦙**](https://ai.facebook.com/blog/large-language-model-llama-meta-ai/), were significantly lower than the numbers in the [published LLaMa paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971).

So we decided to dive in a rabbit hole to understand what was going on and how to fix it 🕳🐇

> In our quest, we discussed with the great [@javier-m](https://huggingface.co/javier-m) who collaborated on the evaluations of LLaMA as well as the no-less amazing [@slippylolo](https://huggingface.co/slippylolo) from the Falcon team. This being said, all the errors in the below should be attributed to us rather than them of course!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our quest, we discussed both with the great [@javier-m](https://huggingface.co/javier-m) who collaborated on the evaluations of LLaMA and the amazing [@slippylolo](https://huggingface.co/slippylolo) from the Falcon team. This being said, all errors in the below text should be attributed to us rather than them of course!
```

First, note that the [Open LLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard) is actually just a wrapper running the open-source benchmarking library [Eleuther AI LM Evaluation Harness](https://github.com/EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness) created by the [EleutherAI non-profit AI research lab](https://www.eleuther.ai/) famous for creating [The Pile](https://pile.eleuther.ai/) and training [GPT-J](https://huggingface.co/EleutherAI/gpt-j-6b), [GPT-Neo-X 20B](https://huggingface.co/EleutherAI/gpt-neox-20b), and [Pythia](https://github.com/EleutherAI/pythia). A team with serious credentials in the AI space!

This wrapper runs evaluations using the Eleuther AI harness on the spare cycles of Hugging Face’s compute cluster, and stores the results in a dataset on the hub that are then displayed on the [leaderboard online space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard).

For the LLaMA models, the MMLU numbers obtained with the [Eleuther AI LM Evaluation Harness](https://github.com/EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness) significantly differ from the MMLU numbers reported in the LLaMa paper.

Why is that the case?

> ## 1001 flavors of MMLU

Reviewer: Nice!

To settle the case, we decided to run these three possible implementations of the same MMLU evaluation on a set of models to rank them according to these results:
- the Harness implementation ([commit e47e01b](https://github.com/EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness/tree/e47e01beea79cfe87421e2dac49e64d499c240b4))
- the HELM implementation ([commit cab5d89](https://github.com/stanford-crfm/helm/tree/cab5d89fadbff86190f29ddfa497301958eaf2ec))
- the Original implementation (with Hugging Face integration by the amazing [@olmer](https://huggingface.co/olmer) at https://github.com/hendrycks/test/pull/13)

(Note that the Harness implementation has been recently updated - more in this at the end of our post)

The results are surprising:

![Leaderboard rankings](./assets/evaluating-mmlu-leaderboard/LLM-01-bis-01.png)

You can find the full evaluation numbers at the end of the post.

> These different implementations of the same benchmark give widely different numbers and, even change the ranking order of the models on the leaderboard!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These different implementations of the same benchmark give widely different numbers and even change the ranking order of the models on the leaderboard!
```

> Let’s try to understand where this discrepancy comes from 🕵️cBut first let’s briefly understand how we can automatically evaluate behaviors in modern LLMs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let’s try to understand where this discrepancy comes from 🕵️But first, let’s briefly understand how we can automatically evaluate behaviors in modern LLMs.
```

B. It created anger at the United States for exaggerating the crisis <br>
C. It increased support for American global leadership under President Obama <br>
D. It reduced global use of the US dollar <br>
Answer:
</td>
    <td>The following are multiple choice questions (with answers) about us foreign policy. <br>
 <br>
Question: How did the 2008 financial crisis affect America's international reputation? <br>
A. It damaged support for the US model of political economy and capitalism <br>
B. It created anger at the United States for exaggerating the crisis <br>
C. It increased support for American global leadership under President Obama <br>
D. It reduced global use of the US dollar <br>
Answer:
</td>
    <td>Question: How did the 2008 financial crisis affect America's international reputation? <br>
Choices: <br>
A. It damaged support for the US model of political economy and capitalism <br>
B. It created anger at the United States for exaggerating the crisis <br>
C. It increased support for American global leadership under President Obama <br>
D. It reduced global use of the US dollar <br>
Answer:
</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
</table><p>
</div>

> The differences between them can seem minute, did you spot them all? Here they are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The differences between them can seem small, did you spot them all? Here they are:
```

> - First sentence, instruction, and topic: Few differences. HELM add an extra space and the Eleuther LM Harness does not include the topic line

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- First sentence, instruction, and topic: Few differences. HELM adds an extra space, and the Eleuther LM Harness does not include the topic line
```

|                                           | MMLU (HELM) | MMLU (Harness) | MMLU (Original) |
|:------------------------------------------|------------:|---------------:|----------------:|
| huggingface/llama-65b                     |       **0.637** |          0.488 |           **0.636** |
| tiiuae/falcon-40b                         |       0.571 |          **0.527** |           0.558 |
| huggingface/llama-30b                     |       0.583 |          0.457 |           0.584 |
| EleutherAI/gpt-neox-20b                   |       0.256 |          0.333 |           0.262 |
| huggingface/llama-13b                     |       0.471 |          0.377 |           0.47  |
| huggingface/llama-7b                      |       0.339 |          0.342 |           0.351 |
| tiiuae/falcon-7b                          |       0.278 |          0.35  |           0.254 |
| togethercomputer/RedPajama-INCITE-7B-Base |       0.275 |          0.34  |           0.269 |

We can see that for the same dataset, both absolute scores and model rankings (see the first figure) are quite sensitive to the evaluation method we decide to use.

> Is there a "best way" to evaluate a model among all these? It's a difficult question. Models may far better one way or another as we see above. To keep some faireness, one may be tempted to select the way where the average score for all tested models is the highest so that we see as much capabilities of the models as possible. But we should note that, as we saw above, using the loglikelihood is helping the model in some way by restricting the 

Reviewer: Is there a "better way" to evaluate a model among all these? It's a difficult question. Models may fare better one way or another, as we saw above. To keep some fairness, one may be tempted to select the setup where the average score for all tested models is the highest, so that we see model capabilities be as high as possible. 
But we should note that, as we saw above, using the log-likelihood is helping the model in some way by restricting the space of answers, while not being possible to do for some models with closed source APIs.
```

# Conclusion

> A key lesson to takeaway is that evaluations are strongly tied to their implementations–down to minute details such as prompts and tokenization. This is why open, standardized, and reproducible benchmarks such as the EleutherAI Eval Harness or Stanford HELM are invaluable to the community. Without them, comparing results across models and papers would be impossible, stifling research on improving LLMs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A key takeaway is that evaluations are strongly tied to their implementations–down to minute details such as prompts and tokenization. 
```

  
**Post scriptum**: In the case of the Open LLM Leaderboard we’ve decided to stick to using community maintained evaluation libraries. Thankfully during the writing of this blog post, the amazing community around the EleutherAI Harness, and in particular [ollmer](https://github.com/EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness/issues/475)

>  who has done an amazing work updating the evaluation of MMLU in the harness to make it similar to the original implementation and match these numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have done an amazing work updating the evaluation of MMLU in the harness to make it similar to the original implementation and match these numbers.
```

> We are updating the leaderboard with the relevant numbers for MMLU, so expect to see scores coming from the Eleuther Harness v2 coming up in the next few weeks! (Running all the models again will take some time, stay tuned :hugs:)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are updating the leaderboard with the relevant numbers for MMLU, so expect to see scores coming from the Eleuther Harness v2 coming up in the next few weeks! Running all the models again will take some time, so stay tuned 🤗
```

|                                           | MMLU (HELM) | MMLU (Harness) | MMLU (Original) |
|:------------------------------------------|------------:|---------------:|----------------:|
| huggingface/llama-65b                     |       **0.637** |          0.488 |           **0.636** |
| tiiuae/falcon-40b                         |       0.571 |          **0.527** |           0.558 |
| huggingface/llama-30b                     |       0.583 |          0.457 |           0.584 |
| EleutherAI/gpt-neox-20b                   |       0.256 |          0.333 |           0.262 |
| huggingface/llama-13b                     |       0.471 |          0.377 |           0.47  |
| huggingface/llama-7b                      |       0.339 |          0.342 |           0.351 |
| tiiuae/falcon-7b                          |       0.278 |          0.35  |           0.254 |
| togethercomputer/RedPajama-INCITE-7B-Base |       0.275 |          0.34  |           0.269 |

We can see that for the same dataset, both absolute scores and model rankings (see the first figure) are very sensitive to the evaluation method we decide to use.

> Let's say you trained yourself a perfect reproduction of the LLaMA 65B model and evaluated it with the harness (score 0.488, see above). You now comparing it to the published number (evaluated on the original MMLU implementation so with a score 0.637). With such a 30% difference in score you're probably thinking: "Oh gpsh, I have completly messed up my training 😱". But nothing could be further from the truth, these are just numbers which are not at all comparable even if they're both labelled as "MMLU score" (and evaluated on the very same MMLU dataset).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say you trained a perfect reproduction of the LLaMA 65B model by yourself, and evaluated it with the harness (score 0.488, see above). Comparing it to the published number (evaluated on the original MMLU implementation, so scored 0.637), and noticing a **30% difference** in score you're probably thinking: "Oh gosh, I have completely messed up my training 😱". But nothing could be further from the truth, as these are just numbers which are not comparable at all, even if they are both labelled "MMLU score" (and evaluated on the very same MMLU dataset).
```

> Now, is there a "best way" to evaluate a model among all the ones we've seen? It's a tricky question. Different models may far differently when evaluated one way or another as we see above when the rankings change. To keep some fairness, one may be tempted to select an implementation where the average score for all tested models is the highest so that we "unlock" as much capabilities as possible from the models, in our case the loglikelihood option of the original implmentation. But as we saw above, using the loglikelihood is also giving some indications to the model in some way by restricting the scope of possible answers and thus is helping the less powerful models maybe too much.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, is there a "better way" to evaluate a model among all the ones we've seen? It's a tricky question. Different models may fare differently when evaluated one way or another, as we see above when the rankings change. To keep this as fair as possible, one may be tempted to select an implementation where the average score for all tested models is the highest, so that we "unlock" as much capabilities as possible from the models. In our case, that would mean using the loglikelihood option of the original implementation. But as we saw above, using the loglikelihood is also giving some indications to the model in some way by restricting the scope of possible answers, and thus is helping the less powerful models maybe too much.
```

| huggingface/llama-13b                     |       0.471 |          0.377 |           0.47  |
| huggingface/llama-7b                      |       0.339 |          0.342 |           0.351 |
| tiiuae/falcon-7b                          |       0.278 |          0.35  |           0.254 |
| togethercomputer/RedPajama-INCITE-7B-Base |       0.275 |          0.34  |           0.269 |

We can see that for the same dataset, both absolute scores and model rankings (see the first figure) are very sensitive to the evaluation method we decide to use.

Let's say you've trained yourself a perfect reproduction of the LLaMA 65B model and evaluated it with the harness (score 0.488, see above). You're now comparing it to the published number (evaluated on the original MMLU implementation so with a score 0.637). With such a 30% difference in score you're probably thinking: "Oh gosh, I have completly messed up my training 😱". But nothing could be further from the truth, these are just numbers which are not at all comparable even if they're both labelled as "MMLU score" (and evaluated on the very same MMLU dataset).

> Now, is there a "best way" to evaluate a model among all the ones we've seen? It's a tricky question. Different models may far differently when evaluated one way or another as we see above when the rankings change. To keep some fairness, one may be tempted to select an implementation where the average score for all tested models is the highest so that we "unlock" as much capabilities as possible from the models, in our case the loglikelihood option of the original implmentation. But as we saw above, using the loglikelihood is also giving some indications to the model in some way by restricting the scope of possible answers and thus is helping the less powerful models maybe too much.

Reviewer: Do you want to add a comment that loglikelihoods are not usable for closed source API models?

> And you, reader, what do you think? This blog post is already long so it's time to open the discussion and invite your comment. Please come discuss this topic in the following discussion thread of the Open LLM Leaderboard: https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard/discussions/82

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And you, reader, what do you think? This blog post is already long so it's time to open the discussion and invite your comments. Please come discuss this topic in the following discussion thread of the Open LLM Leaderboard: https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard/discussions/82
```
